[docs][serve][llm] Reorganize Ray Serve LLM documentation with user guides and improved navigation (#57787)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/serve/llm/architecture/routing-policies.md

# Request routing

Ray Serve LLM provides customizable request routing to optimize request distribution across replicas for different workload patterns. Request routing operates at the **replica selection level**, distinct from ingress-level model routing.

> ## Routing vs ingress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Routing versus ingress
```

You need to distinguish between two levels of routing:

**Ingress routing** (model-level):
- Maps `model_id` to deployment
- Example: `/v1/chat/completions` with `model="gptoss"` → which deployment?

> - `OpenAiIngress` handles this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

│ LLM │  │ LLM │  │ LLM │  │ LLM │
│  1  │  │  2  │  │  3  │  │  4  │
└─────┘  └─────┘  └─────┘  └─────┘
```

## Available routing policies

Ray Serve LLM provides multiple request routing policies to optimize for different workload patterns:

### Default routing: Power of Two Choices

The default router uses the Power of Two Choices algorithm:
1. Randomly sample two replicas
2. Route to the replica with fewer ongoing requests

This provides good load balancing with minimal coordination overhead.

### Prefix-aware routing

The `PrefixCacheAffinityRouter` optimizes for workloads with shared prefixes by routing requests with similar prefixes to the same replicas. This improves KV cache hit rates in vLLM's Automatic Prefix Caching (APC).

The routing strategy:
1. **Check load balance**: If replicas are balanced (queue difference < threshold), use prefix matching
2. **High match rate (≥10%)**: Route to replicas with highest prefix match
3. **Low match rate (<10%)**: Route to replicas with lowest cache utilization
4. **Fallback**: Use Power of Two Choices when load is imbalanced

For more details, see {ref}`prefix-aware-routing-guide`.

## Design patterns for custom routing policies

> Customizing request routers is a feature in Ray Serve's native APIs that can be defined per deployment. For each deployment, you can customize the routing logic that executes every time you call `.remote()` on the deployment handle from a caller. Since deployment handles are globally available objects across the cluster, they can be called from any actor or task in the Ray cluster. For more details on this API, see the {ref}`custom-request-router-guide`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customizing request routers is a feature in Ray Serve's native APIs that you can define per deployment. For each deployment, you can customize the routing logic that executes every time you call `.remote()` on the deployment handle from a caller. Because deployment handles are globally available objects across the cluster, you can call them from any actor or task in the Ray cluster. For more details on this API, see {ref}`custom-request-router-guide`.
```

This allows you to run the same routing logic even if you have multiple handles. The default request router in Ray Serve is Power of Two Choices, which balances load equalization and prioritizes locality routing. However, you can customize this to use LLM-specific metrics.

Ray Serve LLM includes prefix-aware routing in the framework. There are two distinct architectural patterns for customizing request routers:

> ### Pattern 1: Centralized singleton metric store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### A singleton centralizes the  metric store
```

The single actor can provide atomic thread-safe operations such as `get()` for querying the global state and `set()` for updating the global state, which the router can use during `choose_replicas()` and `on_request_routed()`.

```
┌─────────┐     ┌─────────┐     ┌─────────┐
│ Ingress │────►│ Metric  │◄────│ Ingress │
│    1    │     │  Store  │     │    2    │
└────┬────┘     └─────────┘     └────┬────┘
     │                               │
     └────────────────┬──────────────┘
                      │
           ┌──────────┴──────────┐
           │                     │
      ┌────▼────┐           ┌────▼────┐
      │  LLM    │           │  LLM    │
      │ Server  │           │ Server  │
      └─────────┘           └─────────┘
```

```{figure} ../images/routing_centralized_store.png
---
width: 600px
name: centralized_metric_store_pattern
---
Centralized metric store pattern for custom routing
```

> **Pros:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pros
```

Author: formatting of this wouldn't look good?

> - Simple implementation - no need to modify deployment logic for recording replica stats

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simple implementation - no need to modify deployment logic for recording replica statistics
```

- Request metrics are immediately available
- Strong consistency guarantees

> **Cons:**

Author: same as pros

- Single actor can become a bottleneck in high-throughput applications where TTFT is impacted by the RPC call (~1000s of requests/s)

> - Additional network hop for every routing decision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Requires an additional network hop for every routing decision
```

> ### Pattern 2: Metrics broadcasted from Serve controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Pattern 2: Serve controller broadcasts metrics
```

In this approach, the Serve controller polls each replica for local statistics that are then broadcasted to all request routers on their deployment handles. The request router can then use this globally broadcasted information to pick the right replica. After a request reaches the replica, the replica updates its local stats so it can send them back to the Serve controller when polled next time.

```
          ┌──────────────┐
          │    Serve     │
          │  Controller  │
          └──────┬───────┘
                 │ (broadcast)
       ┌─────────┴─────────┐
       │                   │
  ┌────▼────┐         ┌────▼────┐
  │ Ingress │         │ Ingress │
  │  +Cache │         │  +Cache │
  └────┬────┘         └────┬────┘
       │                   │
       └────────┬──────────┘
                │
         ┌──────┴──────┐
         │             │
    ┌────▼────┐   ┌────▼────┐
    │  LLM    │   │  LLM    │
    │ Server  │   │ Server  │
    └─────────┘   └─────────┘
```

```{figure} ../images/routing_broadcast_metrics.png
---
width: 600px
name: broadcast_metrics_pattern
---
Broadcast metrics pattern for custom routing
```

> **Pros:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pros
```

- Scalable to higher throughput
- No additional RPC overhead per routing decision
- Distributed routing decisions

**Cons:**
- There's a lag between the request router's view of stats and the ground truth state of the replicas
- Eventual consistency - routing decisions may be based on slightly stale data
- More complex implementation requiring coordination with the Serve controller

### Choose a pattern

These two architectures capture the most popular ways to customize request routers. There are clear trade-offs between them, so pick the right one and balance simplicity with performance:

> - **Use Pattern 1 (Centralized store)** when you need strong consistency, have moderate throughput requirements, or want simpler implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _Centralized store_ when you need strong consistency, have moderate throughput requirements, or want simpler implementation
```

- **Use Pattern 2 (Broadcast metrics)** when you need very high throughput, can tolerate eventual consistency, or want to minimize per-request overhead

## Custom routing policies

> You can implement custom routing policies by extending Ray Serve's [`RequestRouter`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.RequestRouter.rst) base class. For detailed examples and step-by-step guides on implementing custom routers, see the {ref}`custom-request-router-guide`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can implement custom routing policies by extending Ray Serve's [`RequestRouter`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.RequestRouter.rst) base class. For detailed examples and step-by-step guides on implementing custom routers, see {ref}`custom-request-router-guide`.
```

Key methods to implement:
- [`choose_replicas()`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.RequestRouter.choose_replicas.rst): Select which replicas should handle a request
- [`on_request_routed()`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.RequestRouter.on_request_routed.rst): Update router state after a request is routed
- [`on_replica_actor_died()`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.RequestRouter.on_replica_actor_died.rst): Clean up state when a replica dies

### Utility mixins

Ray Serve provides mixin classes that add common functionality to routers. See the {ref}`custom-request-router-guide` for examples:

- [`LocalityMixin`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.LocalityMixin.rst): Prefers replicas on the same node to reduce network latency
- [`MultiplexMixin`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.MultiplexMixin.rst): Tracks which models are loaded on each replica for LoRA deployments
- [`FIFOMixin`](../../api/doc/ray.serve.request_router.FIFOMixin.rst): Ensures FIFO ordering of requests

### Router lifecycle

> 

Reviewer: Add a sentence to clarify who is performing the following actions. For example, `Ray Serve LLM transitions routers through the following lifecycle stages:`

1. **Initialization**: Router created with list of replicas
2. **Request routing**: `choose_replicas()` called for each request
3. **Callback**: `on_request_routed()` called after successful routing
4. **Replica failure**: `on_replica_actor_died()` called when replica dies
5. **Cleanup**: Router cleaned up when deployment is deleted

#### Async operations

Routers should use async operations for best performance:

```python
# Good: Async operation
async def choose_replicas(self, ...):
    state = await self.state_actor.get.remote()
    return self._select(state)

# Bad: Blocking operation
async def choose_replicas(self, ...):
    state = ray.get(self.state_actor.get.remote())  # Blocks!
    return self._select(state)
```

#### State management

For routers with state, use appropriate synchronization:

```python
class StatefulRouter(RequestRouter):
    def __init__(self):
        self.lock = asyncio.Lock()  # For async code
        self.state = {}
    
    async def choose_replicas(self, ...):
        async with self.lock:  # Protect shared state
            # Update state
            self.state[...] = ...
            return [...]
```

## See also

> - {ref}`prefix-aware-routing-guide` - User guide for deploying prefix-aware routing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {ref}`prefix-aware-routing-guide` - user guide for deploying prefix-aware routing
```
